----------
----------
1. As the supreme favour should be considered the body (bestowed upon the bodhisattva, since the Buddha-characteristics come therein to maturation) as well as the other things connected with it; suprerne entrusting means that he does not loose either what he has obtained or what he has not yet obtained (because he does not forsake the mahāyāna nor his endeavour to be proficient in it).
2. the intention (āśaya) of benefitting others, which appears in his mind (and which aims at illumination) is full of good qualities; it is fourfold: a) vast, (because when the bodhisattva makes his vow, cittotpāda, his purpose is to lead to salvation all the living beings); b) supreme, (because his aim is that aIl these beings should enter perfect nirvāṇa); c) absolute, (because no being at all does in reality exist); d) not erroneous (because in case he thinks of some being as existent he would no longer be a bodhisattva); it represents the way of staying in this vehicle (of the gnosis).
Coming then to the explanation how the prajñāpāramitā should be practised, the text states that the bodhisattva must practise the pāramitā of liberality without therefore taking anything as real. But then, one may ask, why is here liberality alone mentioned when the pāramitās are six?  3. The six pāramitās are alluded to by the mere mention of liberality and this on account of the character common to all of giving something, whether it be a) goods (āmiṣa); b) protection (abhaya); c) the Law itself (dharma). The first contains only one element viz, the giving itself; the second two, viz. observance of the moral rules and patience; the third, three viz, energy, meditation and gnosis. Such a path is said to be a path which has no hold on anything (apratiṣṭhita).
What is the meaning of: “not give a gift while fixing on an object”? 4. No attachment: a) to one’s own self as something really existent (implicit in vastu); b) to the expectation of a reward for the good which has been done (implicit in kvacit, reward being lābha and satkāra) and c) to the result of the good action which has been accomplished (implicit in rūpa). (This suggests that) two things should be equally avoided: the non-practice of liberality (on account of love to one’s own person), and the practice of it when it aims at something else than right meditation. This explains how liberality should be practised.
The sūtra then explains the control of mind: 5. a) the control of mind concerning the group of the things to be considered under three different points of view (viz. as regards liberality in itself, the person to whom liberality is shown and the donor, the three being equally non existent); b) the keeping away of the mind from the assumption of the existence of characters peculiar (to the things, as if they were existent); c) the elimination of the subsequent doubts which may arise, one after the other, as regards the statement contained in the text (chiefly that, if there is no liberality, no merit derived from it would be possible).
Somebody may ask: if the liberality is practised without believing in the existence of the things, dharmas, how then can one practise it in the hope of obtaining Buddhahood? Therefore the sūtra says: tat kiṃ manyase lakṣaṇa saṃpadā etc. “What do you think, Subhūti, is the Buddha to he seen on account of the perfection of his signs etc.?” p. 22,1.1.
6. One may suppose that Buddhahood is something produced (on account of the merits of liberality etc.); therefore, (in order to refute that assumption, here) it is excluded that perfection consists in obtaining the signs (of the mahāpuruṣa), which are peculiar to the apparitional body; in fact the dharmkāya being non-produced, no signs of mahāpuruṣa can be superimposed on it. Therefore the sūtra says: yā sā lakṣaṇasaṃpat ... saivālakṣaṇasaṃpat p. 22, l. 3), viz. Buddhahood is something different from the three characters (which are peculiar to everything produced: origination, duration, destruction). In fact difference from (viz, absence of) that triple character is said to be the Tathāgata (viz. the condition of the Tathāgata is not produced).
[End of chapter 5]
These ideas (the practice of liberality etc. apratiṣṭhita and transcendence of the Buddha) are so difficult to be grasped that, in future, when Buddhism will begin to decline, there will hardly be people disposed to believe it (p. 22, 17).
7. This teaching of something very deep, along with the (peculiar notion) of cause and effect, which is implicit in it, even in this cosmic age (yuga), the worst of all, is not fruitless, because there are (even now) bodhisattvas possessed of the three necessary qualities (good qualities, moral conduct and wisdom, guṇavantaḥ śīlavantaḥ prajñāvantaḥ, as it is said at p. 22, l. 17). Asaṅga is now going to explain that sentence in the following kārikā.
8. Since, in their former existence, they have attended (the Buddhas) by means of the (triple) training and have planted roots of moral merits in front of the Buddhas, other (than the last one, these Bodhisattvas are said) to be possessed of moral conduct and of good qualities. Having so explained why the sūtra calls these bodhisattvas śīlavantaḥ and guṇavantaḥ, the A. passes on to explaining the third epithet: prajñāvantaḥ, possessed of wisdom.
9. They are also possessed of wisdom, because they have cut off any assumption as regards the substantiality of dharmas as well as of any metaphysical entity in the beings. This assumption is eightfold because its objects are eightfold, viz., as will be explained below, four, assumptions concerning the metaphysical entity in beings: ātman, sattva, jīva, pudgala; and four assumptions concerning dharmas: dharma , adharma, saṃjñā, asaṃjñā (p. 23, l. 7-8). Therefore he adds:
10. The assumption of a metaphysical entity in the beings is fourfold; in fact it can be considered a) as something existing apart from the five constituents of a person (ātman); b) as a continuity of existence (sattva); c) as a duration up to the end of life (jīva); d) as a clinging to a new form of existence (pudgala). As regards dharmas:
11. The assumption of dharmas is also fourfold (though no assumption of dharmas, dharmasaṃjñā, is really possible), because a) all dharmas are not existent (the notion of perceiver and perceived being untenable); (on the other hand the assumption of no-dharma is impossible), b) because there exists this non-existence) (as voidness, śūnya; nor assumption, saṃjñā, is possible), c) because there is nothing of which something can be postulated; (but non assumption is also impossible), d) because there is the conventional use of predicating something of something. One may now ask why the bodhisattvas possessed of wisdom have been discussed apart from those possessed of moral conduct and good qualities? The reply is found in the fact that the bhūta-saṃjñā, viz. the assumption according to truth, is something distinct:
12. On account of four reasons, viz.: a) their faith in the sūtras (when they listen to their contents); b) their being pleased with them; c) their understanding of the meaning of the sūtras not according to their verbal expressions; d) on the contrary their grasping properly what has been there taught; (for these reasons) the right assumption of truth is peculiar to these (Bodhisattvas). But who are those creatures to whom the sūtra has already referred and are known and seen by the Tathāgata only? p. 23, l. 2. 4. The sūtra says that the results acquired by those bodhisattvas are known by the Tathāgata, they are not inferred, but intuitively perceived, not seen by the corporeal eye. In order to make this point clear the A. comments:
13. The qualities (referred to above) of these bodhisattvas are not inferred by the Buddhas on account of the results they bring about, but they are (directly) ascertained by them, on account of the knowledge (peculiar to the Buddhas) and descended from the vow originally made. The Buddha has so said (in the passage here considered of the sūtra) in order to refute (the possibility) of such a statement on the part of those who desire to obtain profit and honours (and proclaim themselves to be holy men).
14. The grasping of the Law (as expounded in the sūtras etc.) is such that one should not repose on it (when one has possessed its meaning), but at the same time conform to it; it should then (be taken and) rejected as a raft (which is useful until one reaches the other shore, but is abandoned when one has reached it], This is said to be the hidden implication inherent in the Law (which states that the dharma should be at the same time embraced and abandoned). [End of chapter 6] But now another doubt is possible: if, as stated before, the Buddha should not be viewed from the perfection of his corporeal signs, because Buddhahood is not produced, how is it, then, that in the scriptures it is affirmed that the Buddha has realized the supreme illumination and that he then preached it? This traditional view would contradict what is here affirmed viz, that there is no illumination to be realized, nor any Law to be preached. Commenting upon p. 24, l. 1 fr. the A. goes on to say:
15. By the fact of being apparitional, the apparitional body is not really the Buddha, nor any Law has been taught by it; on the contrary it has been taught that no dharma can ever be grasped in either way, viz, either (as dharma or as non-dharma as stated before) and that it is therefore inexpressible because it transcends the path of words. [End of chapter 7] But though the Law cannot be grasped nor taught, still it is not unreal, it exists. (In fact the sūtra says: tat kiṃ manyase, subhūte, yaḥ kaścit kulaputra etc. 24, l. 10 ff.].
16. The grasping of that dharma (for oneself) and its teaching (to others) is not useless, because one accumulates by it a (great) quantity of merit; it is merit in so far as it is not (taken as) the support of illumination (because when the text speaks of skandha of merit, the word: skandha, has not here the sense of shoulder viz, of that which carries something, but that of accumulation, heap); on the other hand both the grasping of the dharma and its teaching can support the illumination. Therefore the sūtra immediately adds that the supreme illumination is derived from this text p. 25, 1.4 ato nirjāta.
17. The accomplishment of merits (which is derived from the grasping of the dharma and from its teaching to others, gātham udgṛhya parebhyo deśayet p. 25, l. 3) is the summit as the cause by which one obtains what is essential (bodhi – viz. dhārmakāya - here called essential because it is not produced, asaṃskṛta), then, in so far the other body than this (viz. nirmāṇa-kāya) is born out of it and, last, since it shows the uniqueness of the qualities of the Buddha (as is indicated in the sūtra when it states that these are the dharmas of the Buddha, p. 25, l. 8). [End of chapter 8] The sūtra states that all saintly persons are defined as being beyond the conditioned, asaṃskṛtaprabhāvita (p. 24, l. 9); but, on the other hand, the scriptures tell us that the srota-āpanna etc. obtain the fruit of their conduct, Is not this a contradiction? No, for the reason explained in the same sūtra, p. 26, l. 8.
18. No dharma can be grasped nor can it be taught by words because no one (from srota-āpanna ... up to arhat) can grasp a fruit as one’s own (on account of the true nature of everything being asaṃskṛta, asaṃskṛtaprabhāvita, and of the erroneous implications of an eventual assumption that there is a partaker in that fruit like the ātman etc.] Since he is free of both impediments (the moral defilements and the intellectual defilements), in Subhūti both kinds of defilement are absent (araṇa, as is stated at p. 26, l. 12). [End of chapter 9] This statement seems to contradict the other contained in some scriptures that Śākyamuni received the Law from Dīpaṃkara. In fact such a contradiction does not exist, because, as the sūtra tells us, p. 26, l. 18, there is no doctrine which the Buddha received from Dīpamkara.
19. Sākyamuni did not receive by means of words any (instruction how to) realize the doctrine from the Buddha Dīpamkara. Therefore it is proved that in its realization there is nothing which was grasped or was expressed in words. But if it is so, how is it possible to say that the bodhisattva can partake of the Buddha fields (buddha-kṣetra) or be considered king of the Law? A reply to this question is contained in p. 27, l. 1.
20. It is impossible to be a partaker of the Buddha fields, because they are a mere denomination which is the mental outflow of the Buddha; on account of their not having any material consistency (from the point of view of the absolute truth) and of the eminency which they imply, the arrangement (vyūha) of these fields is said to be essentially a non-arrangement (avyūha). Cittam should always be apratiṣṭhitam, mind should repose nowhere (p. 27, l. 5). The Buddha, king of the Law, cannot speak of himself as a Buddha, king of the Law, as if he had grasped the Law, just as the Sumeru cannot speak of itself as being the Sumeru (p. 27, l. 9 ff.).
21. Just as the Sumeru cannot grasp itself as being the king of mountains, in the same way no Buddha (in spite of his greatness) can grasp himself as being in the condition of fruition, saṃbhoga (because no activity of imaginative thought is admissible in either case). In fact it is astate characterized by the absence of any impure influx (āśrava) as well as of karmic forces (saṃskṛta, in so far as it does not depend on any external cause). [End of chapter 10] “This explains the statement of the sūtra that the self (ātmabhāva) is no existent thing (bhāva) and that this non existence (abhāva) is the real self (ātmabhāva), p. 27, l. 13·15. Now one may ask: The sūtra has already spoken of merit; how is it that it now comes back again to the same subject? (p. 27, l. 15 ff.).
22. (The sūtra returns again to the subject of merit) in order to make manifest the varieties in its greatness and in order to prove its peculiarity. Therefore a second instruction (so that faith in it may increase) is here given by means of an example in order to show that the foIlowing exceeds the previous one. (With a different emphasis, in so far as in the previous case the Buddha has spoken of merits which are not a support of illumination and now of a merit which can support illumination). Which is this gift that can he a support to illumination, that is which is the supreme merit? The reply is given in the foIlowing stanzas. [End of chapter 11]
23-25. The gift of the Law is superior to any other gift, because a) it makes worthy the two (viz. the place where the doctrine has been given i. e. preached pṛthivī-pradeśa, p. 28, l. 10, and the giver of it, i.e, the preacher of the doctrine, p. 28, l. 14 dhārayiṣyanti... saṃprakāśayiṣyanti; [End of chapter 12] b) the fruits which are its outflow are very great, (because in fact no dharma has ever been preached, p. 29, l. 3 ff.); c) it is the cause of no defilement 1); (as the gift of other things, p. 29, l. 6 ff., rather it stops all sorts of defilements); d) it surpasses the inferior merit (in so far as its aim is the realization of supreme illumination and not the obtainment of the signs of the mahāpuruṣa. (This would he an erroneous assumption since the dharmakāya, as has been said before, is devoid of any sign, p. 29, l. 13 ff.); e) from the practice of those lower merits one gets as a fruit higher pains (in so far as the practice of liberality, as a result, causes enjoyment to be experienced by one’s own body in a future life, and that body is essentially sorrow, while the merit derived from the gift of the Law makes us abandon numberless bodies) p. 29, l. 19 ff; [End of chapter 13] f) its ends are difficult to he obtained (referring to na mayā śruta-pūrvaḥ said by Subhūti p. 30, l. 8): and its meaning is the highest (referring to: prajñāpāramitā saivāpāramitā p. 31, l. 6 ff.); g) the limits to its contents cannot be known; h) its teachings are not common to those of the other sects (viz. the bhūtsaṃjñā p. 30, l. 10, is peculiar only to this doctrine); i) it is profound and deep; (in so far as no wrong opinion, viparyāsa, is found in this doctrine concerning the existence either of the percipient or of things to he perceived, nātma-saṃjñā . .. pravartiṣyate. .. p. 30, l. 19 ff.; but in spite of this realization of non-existence, the bodhisattva does not feel any mental fear, which is of three kinds: nottrasiṣyanti, no saṃtrasiṣyanti, na saṃtrasam āpatsyante p. 31, l. 5); k) it is superior to the sūtras of the other schools (paraṃparamiteyam p. 31, l. 6); l) it has a great and pure connection (with the lineage) of the Buddhas (yām ca... tathāgata bhāṣante p. 31, l. 7-8). Therefore the merit derived from the understanding and practice of the gnosis distinguishes itself from and it is far superior to that derived from the mere practice of good actions etc. (But though the practice of the gnosis is painful, nevertheless it cannot be said to be a cause of pain; this point is made clear in the two following stanzas:)
----------
----------
26-27. The capacity to endure the difficult practice of the path leading to illumination is designated as being excellent (parama-pāramitā p. 31,1. 8) because; a) it is propitious (consubstantiated with the perfections) b) it is impossible to enumerate the merits deriving from it; c) moreover, since in this doctrine there is no place either for the notion of a self (which can be offended) or for that of an offence, there is in it no possibility of admitting a condition of suffering (p. 31, l. 11 ff.); d) this practice of the path to illumination is (in fact) accompanied by satisfaction, because, being compassion, it does not cause sorrow as fruit. It may be that somebody, on account of the sufferings implicit in the practice of the six perfections, gives up the vow of realizing the supreme illumination. In order to clear up this doubt the sūtra states that one should abandon all sorts of notions etc. (sarvasaṃjñāṃ vivarjayitvā etc. p. 31 last line p. 32 first line), because only a man who has not formulated that vow can be deterred by the sufferings of that practice, not he who has formulated the vow and, therefore, has implicitly abandoned all notions and is apratiṣṭhitacitta, viz. with mind resting nowhere. Such is the purpose of the following stanza.
----------
28. In fact a strong effort is to be made in the effectuation of not renouncing the vow of reaching illumination; so also in the mastery of the perfection of patience (kṣāntiparamitā) and in the means instrumental to that (viz. realization of illumination, the perfection of liberality, etc. all depending on the mind not resting anywhere). This statement of the mind reposing nowhere (apratiṣṭhitacitta) as a fundamental quality of the bodhisattva, seems to be contradicted by what the sūtra states, viz. that the vow of attaining illumination and the practice of the pāramitās should be followed in order to benefit beings. Therefore the mind should at least repose on the thought that beings exist. The stanza 29 solves this doubt.
29. The practice of the proper behaviour (pratipatti) is to he understood as being useful to the creatures in so far as it is the cause of (their henefit); but it should also he understood as being devoid of any assumption implying that those creatures have the character of real things, sarva-sattvānām arthāya 32, l. 9). But what is then the real character of the beings?
30. That thing which we call a creature (in reality is nothing but) a denomination (applied to the synthesis of) some components (skandha); (therefore it is a non-notion, asaṃjñā p. 32, l. 10 and devoid of any essence). These two notions viz. ātman, as well as dharma, completely disappear in the Victorious One; therefore (creatures and dharmas as well), are not existent for the Buddhas in so far as these are possessed of the vision of reality. But if that is really so and no practice really exists, then does this mean that there is no cause of the fruit to he realized, viz. the illumination or, in other words, that the path is no cause of the fruit? Certainly not, because the sūtra says: bhūtavādī etc. p. 32, l. 11).
31. The path does not repose on the notion of its being a cause of a fruit consisting in Buddhahood (which would then he produced: saṃskṛta), but it is nevertheless the instrumental cause of its fruit; because the Buddhas (who proclaimed this doctrine) tell always the truth. This statement of truth by them is fourfold:
32. Viz. a) the promise (to become a Buddha), b, c) the teaching contained in the Lesser and the teaching contained in the Greater Vehicle, d) that contained in prophecies delivered by the Buddha which never turn out to he false. This explains the fourfold expression of the sūtra: bhūtavādī, satyavādī, tathāvādī, ananyathāvādī. But how is it possible to say that the very teaching of the Tathāgata is such that it cannot he said to he either true (satyam) or false (mṛṣā)? (p. 32, l. 14).
33. Therefore since it does not reach anything (as a real existent thing, in so far as there is nothing which exists behind these words), this teaching is not true; it cannot either he said to he untrue, in so far as it is in agreement with (the fact that illumination is reached); it is taught so as to serve as a counteragent to the inclination of taking words according to their literal meaning (as if they corresponded to an entity). (Therefore there is no contradiction when the sūtra says: bhūtavādī tathāgata, and afterwards adds: na satyam, na mṛṣā). Now a doubt is possible; if the saints are, as has been told, asaṃskrta-prabhāvitā (where asaṃskṛta = tathatā), then, how is it that Buddhahood is realized by a mind reposing nowhere (apratiṣṭhitacitta)? When illumination is realized a mind should repose somewhere (pratiṣṭhitacitta), Moreover, if this illumination is eternal and all pervading, then, how is it that sometimes it may he realized and sometimes not?
34. Though the absolute (tathatā) is always and everywhere, still it cannot he realized by those who, on account of ignorance, have their mind reposing somewhere (pratiṣṭhita) but, on the contrary, it is realized by the others whose mind, on account of right knowledge, reposes nowhere (apratiṣṭhita). (This is further explained by an example p. 32,1.14 ff.).
35. Ignorance is like darkness, knowledge is said .to be like light. The counteragent (of erroneous assumptions, here the example of the sun destroying darkness) and its opposite (here the example of darkness) are respectively conducive to realization of truth and to loss of it.
36. Now it is told what kind of merit is derived from such and such practice of a right behaviour and of what kind of (karmic) effects this practice of a right behaviour in the Law consists.
37. Concerning the right behaviour, as regards the doctrine consisting of sentences (expounded in the sūtra), it can be of three kinds: one may grasp the doctrine, one may he learned in it, one spreads it explaining it to others (udgrahiṣyati, dhārayiṣyati, vācayiṣyati) p. 32, l. 21. As regards the meaning, it can he obtained either from another or by oneself, viz. by listening to it or meditating on it,
38. This behaviour (viz. intended to grasp the Law) causes the spiritual ripeness of oneself; the other (viz. to explain it to others) causes the spiritual ripeness of the other creatures (cf. p. 33, l. 3). Therefore one kind of merit is superior to the other on account of its intrinsic greatness, as well as of the great time it requires to be accumulated. [End of chapter 14] (In stanza 36 mention was made of the effects connected with this practice, of the right behaviour (pratipatti). Now one may ask which are these effects connected with the Law? They are explained in the following three stanzas.
39. a) The character of not being accessible (to common people, acintya p. 33, l. 14), b) the uniqueness, (in so far as it is not common to śrāvakas, atulyo, ibid.), c) its being resorted to by great men, viz. those who have embraced the great vehicle, agrayāna-saṃprasthitānām p. 33, l. 15-16), d) difficulty to he heard, na hi sakyam śrotum p. 34, l. 5, e) the capacity to develop to the utmost (pure) elements (viz, the meritorious tendencies) up to the extreme, acintyena... puṇyaskandhena p. 34,1. nābodhisattvapratijñaih... dhārayitum, p.34, 1.6-7.
40. f) the capacity of grasping (exactly) the supreme Law, g) the capacity of purifying the place where the Law was preached, a place worthy of worship, api tu khalu... bhaviṣyanti p. 34, I. 9-12. [End of chapter 15] h) the capacity of clearing away ill impurities, yāni ca teṣām p. 34, l. 17-19; i) the quick realization of the mystic knowledge (abhijñā), ahhijānāmy aham p. 34, l. 20 ff.
41. k) a great ripeness of the perfections to he experi:nced in the various worlds, sacet punaḥ, Subhūte, teṣām... pratikāṃkṣitavyaḥ p. 35, 1.12:17; all these are said to he the effects of the behaviour in the Law. [End of chapter 16] How is it that on this very subject Subhūti puts in another question, though the Buddha has already stated that there are three kinds of right behaviour? P. 35.
42. If, when one practises the right behaviour, one assumes: “I am a bodhisattva” (or “I am practising the Law” or “I subdue my mind”), this is called obstruction of mind (because in reality there is no bodhisattva): mind should repose nowhere (apratiṣṭhitam). Now one may contend: in the sūtra it is written that there is no bodhisattva; but, then, if there is no bodhisattva, how could the Buddha Sākyamuni practise at the time of Dīpaṃkara?
43. Since it was then prophesied by Dīpaṃkara that I should have become a Buddha in the future, I then did not practise, at the time of Dīpaṃkara, the supreme practice (because if I had then acquired the illumination, no prophecy could have heen made concerning me. Moreover when a bodhisattva makes the vow to become a Buddha, then, if he thinks that there is no illumination, this implies that there are no Buddhas - and this is a wrong assumption of nonexistence. In order to avoid this erroneous assumption the sūtra states that the Buddha is the real absolute, bhūtatathatā , p. 37, l. 3, where bhūta means “not false” and tathatā that “it cannot become another or change”. If, on the contrary, one thinks that illumination is realised, this is a false statemont, vitatha p. 37, l. 7); in fact illumination is equal to the practice (in the sense that there is nothing which can he practised, just as there is no such dharma as illumination which can he realised; if illumination could he ohtained) in that case it would not he real, being something produced. But is this not a complete negation of the possibilities of reaching perfect illumination? The sūtra replies: “what is realized by the Buddha is neither true nor false”, viz. na satyaṃ na mṛṣā p. 37, l. 13.
44. In so far (as all dharmas) are characterized as being devoid of any proper character, the dharmas are qualified as being not false, Therefore all dharmas are like the dharmas of the Buddhas (p. 77, l. 13, viz. bhūtatathatā) and so their character is that of being devoid of existence. What is the meaning of the words upetakāyo mahākāyo? “possessed of body, with a great body” p. 37, l. 15.
45. On account of having a dharma-body, the Buddha is said to be similar to a man; on account of the absence of the two impediments (viz. the intellectual and moral impediments), his (body) is all-pervading.
46. But this body is also said to he “a great body”, because it is possessed of a greatness of qualities. The Buddha is also spoken of as being without a body, akāya at p. 37, l. 17, because his is a body of the non-existence [viz, asaṃskṛta-tathatā). Now the douht may arise: if there are no bodhisattvas, then there is no perfect illumination realized by the Buddha, there are no creatures to lead to nirvâna and no paradises; what would, then, he the scope of the vow of the bodhisattva to help the beings to enter nirvāna or to make them think of paradise? The following stanzas answer this doubt.
47. a) The inability to understand properly the dharmadhātu, b) the idea that one may lead creatures to nirvāṇa (p. 37, l. 20) and c) the opinion of purification (as leading to) Buddha-fields (p. 38, 1. 6) such (assumptions) as these are wrong views.
48. The man who concentrates his intelligence on ail dharmas either of the (common) creatures or of the bodhisattvas (referring to sūtra p. 38, l. 9) and recognizes them as devoid of any self, this man, he he an unworthy man or he he a saint, is called an intelligent man, (a bodhisattva). [End of chapter 17] If one becomes enlightened only in so far as one does not see any dharma, then the Buddhas do not see any dharma. But this does not imply that the Buddha has no eyes (p. 38, l. 12 ff.):
49. Although there is no perception of a dharma, this does not mean that (the Buddha) has no eyes; because his eye is fivefold and it sees the different errors.
50. In so far as the various erroneous ideations are excluded from mindfnlness, their series (or flux as hinted by the sūtra: citta-dhāra ... bhāṣita p. 39, l. I1) has no stand whatever, (because past, future and present, in which that continuity shoùld develop, are not existent); therefore they are said to he false or wrong. [End of chapter 18] But why does the sūtra insert here, p. 39, l. 15, p. 40, l. 7, a new example concerning the accumulation of merits? One may in fact contend: if there is no such a thing as a flux of mental moments, the merit also which is accumulated would implicitely be impossible. If this merit is a false assumption, how then could virtue be realized? The reply is that there is no such thing as a flux of mental statuses; but this does not mean that accumulation of merit is to be avoided.
51. It should be known that there is no falsity in the accumulation of merit, in so far as this merit is a support of right understanding. Therefore, in order to explain the significance of this merit, there is another example concerning that very merit, (bahu puṇyaskandha p.: 40, l. 1, where skandha is certainly not taken in the sense of constitutive element, u padan askandha, because this would never be the support of right knowledge) [End of chapter 19] But now one may urge: if the Buddha is unoonditioned, asaṃskṛta, how then is it stated that he is possessed of the lower and superior signs of the great man? In order to reply to this question the sūtra says that the Buddha is not seen as the completion of bodily forms, rupakāyapariniṣpattyā p.40, l. 9 ff. nor as perfection of the signs of the great man (lakṣaṇasaṃpadā p.40, l. 13). Here, as said in the commentary, rūpa should be understood as anuvyañjana viz, the 84 minor signs. The Buddha replies that rūpakāyapariniṣpatti is in fact apariniṣpatti and that lakṣaṇasaṃpat is alakṣaṇasaṃpat. What does this mean?
52-53. The completion of the dharmakāya is not said to consist in the (appearance of the) secondary signs (= rūpakaya), nor is it the perfection of the signs of the great man, because that (perfection of dharmakāya) is considered as the absence of any body 1) (p. 40, n. 8-12); on the other hand since both these perfections (rūpakāyapariniṣpatti and lakṣaṇasaṃpat) are not distinct from the dharmakāya itself, (one should not think) that those two perfections are not the Tathāgata; (the sūtra) says once more “perfection” because their (co)existence (is indicative of the fact that) the existence of those two (as two contraries) has been transcended. [End of chapter 20] (But now one may ask: if in the Buddha those two perfections are absent, then how is the teaching of the Buddha possible? p. 40, l. 17 ff.).
----------
54. Like the Buddha, the teaching of him (the Buddha) also cannot be said to exist: the teaching is imagined to be twofold (viz. words and meaning, which is hinted at by the repetition of the expression dharmadeśanā dharmadeśanā in the sūtra, p. 41, l. 2). (The sūtra adds that there is no such thing as the teaching of the doctrine, dharmadesanā) because the teaching, being not distinct from the dharmakāya, has no character of its own. But then, one may object, if there is no Buddha as the Teacher, then, evenhis teaching, being identified with the dharmakāya, will not exist. Who is the man who believes in such a deep theory? The sūtra therefore states: na te sattvā nāsattva etc., p. 41, l. 7.
55. It is not that there are not those who believe in the depth of the things to be taught or of their teacher. They are neither sattva, beings, nor asattva, non beings: (as beings are here intended) those who are devoid of the characters of the saints (ārya), but possessed of those of the profane - pṛthagjana and as non-beings those who possess sainthood. (This means that as regards profaneness (pṛthagjanatva) beings are asattva; but having regard to sainthood they are not asattva. Therefore when the Buddha speaks of asattva non-being, he does so referring to the profane, but when he speaks of a non-asattva, this he does referring to the saints). [End of chapter 21] If, then, there is no such thing as the supreme illumination why then does the sūtra continully mention the supreme illumination? The s û t r a replies: nāsti sa etc. p. 41, l. 12.
56-57. The illumination is to be known as supreme (p. 41, l. 14) because there is not the smaUest dharma (aṇur api dharmah, p. 41, l. 13) (which can transcend it); (this depends on the fact that) in the absolute (dharmadhātu) there is no possibility of further growth; on the contrary, there is complete equality of purity (p. 41, l. 16-18). It depends also on its proper character (viz. no ego, abso1ute stillness which does not imply any gradation), and on its being the supreme means (in so far as aU good dharmas are there completely perfected and there is no perfection, saṃpatti, of good dharmas except in illumination). What is the meaning of the good dharmas referred to by the sūtra p. 41, l. 19? Is this not contradictory with the statement that there is no dharma? (57, vv. b-d). In so far as there is no dharma by being possessed of defilement there cannot either be such a thing (as its opposite viz.) a good dharma. Therefore this dharma is called the good dharma (because its nature is absolutely, not relatively, good, atyantakuśala) [End of chapters 22-23] But if good dharmas are so understood, as conducive to illumination, then the dharma which is taught, the teaching, being avyākṛta, cannot he conducive to illumination. The doubt is out of place, as shown in the following stanza:
----------
58. Though the teaching is avyākrta, it must not he considered as non-conducive to the illumination. Therefore only this jewel of the teaching is superior to any other jewel. So the merit which is derived from this gnosis is incomparably superior to any other merit as stated in the sūtra p. 42, l. 4 ff.
59. As regards (the fourfold determination of difference in merit concerning) number, power, kind and connection, there is nothing in this world which, thoroughly examined, can he taken as an object of comparison with it. (refers to p. 42, l. 6 with full list at p. 35, l. 10). [End of chapter 24] One may urge: if the nature of dharma is pure identity, according to p. 41, l. 16, then there would he nobody to lead to it, nor anybody who could he led; this would contradict the statement of the Buddha that his aim is the liberation of beings. In order to meet this objection the sūtra says: nāsti ... parimocitaḥ p. 42, l. 10.
60. Because the creatures are identical with the absolute, no creature is liherated by the Victorious Ones, in as much as the elements composing the illusory person (skandha) along with names, (viz. nāmakāya) are not outside the absolute. Suppose that it were affirmed that within the skand has there is a soul to he liberated; this would amount to saying that there is a being (sattva), and therefore the sūtra adds: ātmagrāha – agrāha p. 42, l. 13.
61. If one maintains the existence of a dharma whatsoever, one commits the same mistake as that of asserting the existence of a self (ātman). If (the existence) of a creature (to be) liberated is admitted, this is considered to he the (erroneous) admission of something which is no object of admission. [End of chapter 25] It may now he urged: You said that the Tathāgata cannot he seen as a perfection of signs (laksaṇasaṃpat) because he is dharmakāya, the ahsolute; but nevertheless this dharmakiāya, which is essentially the Tathāgata, can he inferred from that perfection of signs which make us know his perfection of merits. Therefore the sātra adds: tat kiṃ manyase... p. 42, l. 17.
62. Not indeed on account of the visible body can the Tathiigata he inferred, since He is only the ahsolute (dharmakāya); the Universal Ruler (cakravartin) (who is equally possessed of the characteristic signs of the great man) cannot he taken for the Tathāgata (as could happen if the mere presence of the signs is taken as indicative of the Buddha). That perfection of signs is certainly the maturation of the merits accumulated, but this is not the cause of supreme illumination: because, as concluded by the sūtra p. 43, l. 3 ff.:
63. The dharmakāya is not said to he obtained by a perfect accumnlation of merits, the maturation of which are the (thirtytwo) signs of the great man; in fact the means (in both cases) are different; (viz. gnosis being the very essence of dharmakāya, that dharmakāya cannot he identical with merits). Two gāthās, giving a resumé of these statements, follow in the sūtra, p. 43, l. 6-9.
64. The profane cannot know the Buddha, because they only see his figure and hear his voice, In fact the ahsolute (dharmakāya), which is the only reality, transcends the field of discursive intelligence. [End of chapter 26] Somebody may argue that in so far as merits are not conducive to illumination, the meritorious deeds of the bodhisattva would have no result. In order to eliminate this doubt the sūtra answers: tat kiṃ manyase etc. p. 43, l. 10.
65. Even so, that merit is in no way lost nor its fruit suppressed; even if one possesses the supreme patience consisting in the realization that all dharmas are not born, no annihilation of merits (p. 43 last line p. 44 first line) follows from it, because one has obtained the realization of the spotless reality. [End of chapter 27]
66. Therefore in order to explain again that merit (is not in vain), another example is taught: (p. 43, l. 18 ff.); but since this merit do es not lead to a retribution (because illumination is asaṃskṛta, unconditioned), any acceptance of it do es not hring with it a wrong grasping of it (udgraha) as something existent; (this in fact would he a wrong view, sāsrava). [End of chapter 28] But it may he argued that, if the Bodhisattvas do not take upon themselves the fruit of their merits, how can this fruit he known and how can the visible activity of the Buddhas he explained? p. 44, l. 7 ff. api tu khalu ... yaḥ kaścid evaṃ vadet ...
67-68. The miraculous fruit of that merit which they accumulate and their conversion of creatures is the work which the Buddhas accomplish in the (ten) quarters, viz. (everywhere and for ever) automatically (anābhogena). Their (apparent) (actions such as) going, and coming are accomplishad by miraculous emanations; but in reality the Buddhas are for ever motionless. Their abiding in the absolute (dharmadhātu) is stated to he neither identity with nor diversity from it. [End of chapter 29] What then is the meaning of the example of the atoms which follows in the sūtra p. 44, l. 12 ff. ?
----------
69. When the sūtra refers as an example to the reducing of the universe into a dust of atoms 1), this example is meant to make clear the same idea. The expression “reducing into dust” is intended to show (how the) destruction of the defilement should be understood.
70. The fact that there is no condition either of mass (saṃcaya) (p. 44, l. 17) of atoms nor of matter, indicates that things are not unity. The fact that a condition of collection exists, indicates that there is no diversity. (Just as when the atoms are reduced into dust they are neither identical with the thing they formed nor different, because the parts and the whole cannot be conceived one without the other, though they represent two different conditions of being, so also the state of Buddhahood is neither identical with the dharmadhātu nor different). p. 45, l. 7). But how is it that the profane thinks to grasp what in reality cannot be grasped? (sa ca bālapṛthagjanair udgrhītaḥ p. 45 l. 7)
71. Since the profane possesses only a wordly knowledge, he grasps all this, i.e, the nction of a mass or of matter referred to in the above example, in a different, way (from what it really is); it is in fact impossible that the illumination be obtained by the suppression of both, the ego (ātman) and the elements of existence (dharma), because both do not exist (and therefore cannot be suppressed). [End of chapter 30] So it is not the suppression of either the atom or of the elements of existence which leads to illumination, but the suppression of the wrong views concerning them. (p. 45, l. 11-12 yā sā... ātmadṛṣṭis... etc.].
72. Therefore both the view (viz. the affermative assumption of the existence of the ego or of the elements, dharma) as well as the non-view, (viz. the negation of something) derive from the assumption of something unreal or wrongly conceived. Both views (being originated from wrong imagination) are a subtle cover (āvaraṇa) which is eliminated by the knowledge of truth (as propounded in the sūtra). But then the sūtra adds: evam... jñātavyā... adhimoktavyāḥ p. 45, l. 14 ff. What is the meaning of these words?
73. (Those words) indicates that that cover should be eliminated by the twofold knowledge (viz. the ordinary and the transcendental) and by concentration upon it, [End of chapter 31] (Anyhow the merit derived from the gift of this gnosis leading to the realization of truth is immensely great. This is stated in the sūtra p. 45, l. 19 ff. with the purpose of making it sure that) such merit is not not indestructible, because it has been revealed by the emanations of the Buddha, (though the Tathāgata rests forever in his transcendent inactivity). Why then the sūtra asks kathaṃ saṃprakāsayet? p. 46, l. 3.4.
74. When the Tathāgatas preach (the Law) (for the benefit of the creatures), they do not preach the (existence) of a self saying “I am a miraculous emanation”; and therefore, because they do not preach the self, this preaching is excellent. But is it not stated that the Buddhas preach without end the Law through infinite emanations (nirmāṇa)? How then can they abide in a nirvanic condition?
75. The nirvāṇa which is realized in the Tathāgata is not a product of karmic forces, saṃskāra, nor something different: (though they abide in the nirvanic condition, still they can make their emanations appear in order to benefit the creatures; but, in reality they do not abide either in nirvāṇa or in the samsaric world. All this can be clearly understood by an exhaustive enquiry into the correct knowledge concerning the nature (of what is produced by karmic agency, is conditioned, saṃskṛta) and happens to be in nine ways (as enunciated in the concluding gāthā of the sūtra p. 46, l. 5-6, and explained in the following stanzas).